% sample file for Modelica Conference paper

\documentclass[11pt,a4paper,twocolumn]{article}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\graphicspath{{fig/}}
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}    %% european characters can be used
\usepackage{lmodern,amsmath,mathptmx,url}      %% recommended for readable pdf
\pagestyle{empty}                %% no page numbers!
\usepackage{geometry}            %% please don't change geometry settings!
\geometry{left=20mm, right=20mm, top=25.4mm, bottom=25mm, noheadfoot, columnsep=8mm}
\parindent0pt
\bibliographystyle{ieeetr}

% some additional packages
\usepackage{listings} % for code listings
\usepackage{color}
\usepackage[hidelinks=true]{hyperref}

% usefull commands
\newcommand{\myr}{\textsuperscript{\textregistered}}
\newcommand{\ud}{\mathrm{d}}
\newcommand{\matx}[1]{\mathbf{#1}}
\newcommand{\recon}{\texttt{recon}}
\newcommand{\wall}{\texttt{wall}}
\newcommand{\meld}{\texttt{meld}}
\newcommand{\msgpack}{\texttt{msgpack}}
\newcommand{\code}[1]{\texttt{#1}} % make quoting code text a bit simpler

\begin{document}

\title{\textbf{{\small Modelica'2014}\\
    \recon -- Web and network friendly simulation data formats}}

\author{Michael Tiller\\
  \href{http://xogeny.com}{Xogeny Inc.}, USA\\
  \href{mailto:michael.tiller@xogeny.com}
       {\nolinkurl{michael.tiller@xogeny.com}}
  \and Peter Harman\\
  \href{http://www.cydesign.com}
       {CyDesign}, UK\\
  \href{mailto:peter@cydesign.com}{\nolinkurl{peter@cydesign.com}}}
\date{} % <--- leave date empty
\maketitle\thispagestyle{empty} %% <-- you need this for the first page

\section*{Abstract}

There are many different commonly used file formats for storing time
series data.  Most of these file formats are designed with the
assumption that the file itself will be locally available to the
software that will be reading or writing the data stored in them.
While this assumption is an excellent one for desktop based tools with
direct access to disk drives capable of moving virtually
instantaneously around from sector to sector, there are growing number
of applications for which local access is not necessarily available.
For these applications, we've initiated the \recon project to develop
more suitable formats.

With the emergence of web and cloud based modeling and simulation
technologies, the time has come to explore file formats specifically
optimized for non-desktop applications.  In this paper, we present a
new set of file formats that are specifically designed for web and
cloud based approaches.  This paper reviews the key requirements for
web and cloud enabled applications and then presents a specification
for two file formats that address those requirements.

When considering the various use cases that drove our requirements, we
recognized that two different file formats were actually required.
The first format, the \wall format, is optimized for writing.  The
other format, the \meld format, is optimized for reading over a
network.  We will discuss the importance of each of these formats and
describe the use cases for which they are most appropriate.

In the open tradition of the Mdoelica Association, the authors have
made specifications and implementations for these formats available as
open source libraries with the hope that they will benefit the
community as a whole.

\paragraph{Keywords:}\emph{modelica, FMI, simulation results,
  cloud, web, open source}

\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:intro}

Several groups have examined the issue of standardized file formats
\cite{AndreasHDF5,GallHDF5} in the context of Modelica.  In keeping
with the principals of the Modelica Association, an ideal choice would
be a production ready format that is open source and cross-platform.
With this requirements in mind, most people consider HDF5 a natural
choice.  There are already open source implementations and the file
format has been widely used.  In fact, it has even been adopted by The
MathWorks for use in MATLAB.

But HDF5 has some important drawbacks.  The first is that it is not
truly cross-platform.  The reference implementation of HDF5 is written
in C.  The implementation is primarily targeted for use with in C, C++
or Fortran applications.  While there are various libraries available
for reading HDF5 on the Java platform\cite{HDFJava}, they are
incomplete and awkward to use.

Another issue with HDF5 is that for simple time-series data it is over
engineered.  HDF5 is feature rich, of that there is no question, but
these features come at the cost of complexity.  This is why you see
very few implementations outside of the reference implementation.
Furthermore, the file format makes extensive use of ``seek''
operations and assumes they are relatively in expensive.  This
assumption is reasonable if you are able to communicate directly with
the hard drive that the files are stored on, but it isn't reasonable
when these files are only available through the network.

There are, of course, many standards for manipulating data in web or
cloud based environments.  The most popular formats, by far, are
Javascript Object Notation (or JSON, for short) and XML.  There are a
number of different approaches to marshalling and unmarshalling data
for consumption by cross-platform tools.  Approaches like Google
Protocol Buffers\cite{GPB}, Avro\cite{Avro}, Thrift\cite{Thrift} and
others are working hard to try and knit together the various ``big
data'' tools like Hadoop\cite{Hadoop}, Storm\cite{Storm} and ???.

So where does that leave us?  Should we adopt the tried and true
standards from the engineering world and simply live with their lack
of interoperability with important platforms like Java or Javascript
and poor performance when accessed remotely?  Or, should we try and
adapt tools from the ``big data'' world, that were developed for quite
different use cases, to work in the engineering world.

In some sense, we've chosen a compromise.  As we will see shortly, the
\wall and \meld formats are fundamentally derived from the
\msgpack\cite{msgpack} specification.  This gives us excellent cross
platform compatibility.  But \msgpack is simply a serialization
protocol.  To address some of our more important concerns, to be
discussed shortly, we needed to design a structural context in which
to employ \msgpack. So in this sense, we've created a set of original
file formats that leverage open standards but re-purpose them for
modeling and simulation applications.

\section{Goals}
\label{sec:background}

After independently reviewing various file formats, the authors were
not happy with the existing options for web and cloud based modeling
and simulation.  The \recon project started as a discussion about
requirements.  For our applications, the following requirements were
identified:

\subsection{#1 - Adding Data}

% 1) It should be easy to append data to a file.

Simulations are constantly producing additional data.  For this
reason, adding new data to an existing file is an operation performed
many times during a simulation.  For this reason, adding data to an
existing file should be fast and easy.  The key thing is to avoid having to
rewrite previous data or, even worse, move data around within the
file.  For this reason, the ideal solution is to have the ability to
simply append new data at the end of the file.

\subsection{#2 - Minimizing I/O}

% 2) It must be possible to extract individual signals with a minimum of I/O.

In web and cloud based applications, it is not always practice to
download the complete set of results for a simulation into the browser
environment.  There are many use cases where it would be best to be
able to access results ``on demand''.  In these environments, such
requests for data will be done via HTTP\cite{HTTP}.  However, each of
these requests will come with far greater latency than a simple
request to read from a disk drive and far less bandwidth.  As such, we
would want to minimize the number of such requests and the amount of
data necessary to transmit in each request.  This means we need a way
to ``cluster'' the data we are interested in so as to minimize both
the number of requests required and minimize the amount of data in
each response.

\subsection{#3 - Cross Platform Support}

% 3) The format must work across languages.

The file formats developed as part of the \recon project are targeted
at web and cloud based applications.  Client side web programming is
dominated by Javascript.  On the other hand, server side programming
is done in a wide variety of languages (*e.g.,* Java, Python,
Javascript).  Meanwhile, numerical analyses such as simulation are
typically done in languages like C, C++ and FORTRAN.  For this reason,
it should be possible to implement libraries in all of these languages
for generating and extracting simulation results.

\subsection{#4 - Aliasing}

% 4) It must be possible to define aliases.

One of the common patterns in component-oriented modeling approaches
like Modelica is that many variables end up with exactly the same
solution trajectories.  When storing simulation results from such
tools, it is useful to recognize that considerable disk space can be
saved by recognizing the fact that these variables all share a common
underlying solution trajectory.  Typically, the data for each unique
solution trajectory is stored once and each variable is simply a
reference to the underlying solution trajectory.  Even more storage
can be saved by recognizing that some trajectories are related to
other trajectories by very simple transformations (*.e.g.,* a simple
sign change).

For this reason, it is very useful if these kinds of relationships are
directly represented in the file format itself.

\subsection{#5 - Data Types}

% 5) It should be possible to store "structures/dictionaries" as well
% as regular array types.

When dealing with simulation results that come from the solution of
differential equations, the main type of result is a solution
trajectory.  In these cases, both the dependent and independent
variables are typically represented as floating point numbers.

But these are not the only types of data a simulation or other
numerical analysis might yield.  From the Modelica world, we might
easily have results that are either integers, booleans or strings
(since these are all fundamental built-in types in Modelica).  But why
not hierarchical data structures (as represented by records in
Modelica) as well?

\subsection{#6 - Metadata}

% 6) It must be possible to associate metadata with entities in the
% file.

One issue with data files is that if you don't provide a means for
associating metadata with entities in the file, the metadata will {\b
become} entities in the file.  For this reason, we deemed it important
that metadata should be treated in a ``first-class'' way.
Specifically, it should be possible to associated metadata with the
file as a whole, with data structures in the file all the way down to
individual signals.  This would allow tools to persist other important
information, beyond the solution, in these data files.  For example,
information about common plots or plotting options, descriptions of
the signals, units or display units could all be managed in a
structured way without being confused with data and without needing to
be a formal part of the file format specification.

\subsection{#7 - Hierarchy}

% 7) It should be possible to organize information hierarchically.

Many tools create structures that are hierarchical.  In the Modelica
world, we have deep hierarchies of instances in simulated models.  We
also have hierarchies for packages and the definitions contained in
them.  So it is important the a file format can represent this
hierarchies in some way.

In our experience, trying to organize results according to an instance
hierarchy creates quite a bit of complexity.  While tools could
exploit some of the previous requirements (primarily #5 and #6) to
achieve a hierarchical representation, we've found that simply
encoding hierarchy in the names of variables (*e.g.*
\code{car.engine.crankshaft.tau}) is typically sufficient and can
avoid considerable complexity.

\subsection{#8 - Easy Translation}

% Support for heterogenous data (no strict type constraints)

Even though our goal is to have a format that is well suited to web
and cloud based application, it should also be capable of representing
the kinds of simulation results as we normally think of them.  For
this reason, we include as a requirement the ability to represent the
widely used ``dsres'' format used by many tools including Dymola and
OpenModelica.  In particular, it should be possible to preserve all
the data normally contained in these formats when translating them
into the \recon formats.  Furthermore, the \recon formats should have
comparable storage efficiency (*i.e.,* the files should be
approximately the same size, regardless of format).

\section{Approach}

% Started with BSON, switched to MsgPack

\section{Specification}
\label{sec:spec}

\subsection{Wall Format}
\label{sec:wall_spec}

\subsection{Meld Format}
\label{sec:meld_spec}

\lstset{language=python}
\begin{lstlisting}[frame=single]  % Start your code-block
f()
\end{lstlisting}

\section{Discussion}
\label{sec:discussion}

% Caching

\subsection{Performance}

% Space efficiency

\subsection{Use Case}

% # of reads

\subsection{Metadata}

% Metadata connected to everything

\subsection{Transforms}

\section{Conclusion}
\label{sec:conclusion}
%TODO

\bibliography{recon}
\end{document}
